+++
title = 'The Value of Resilience'
date = 2024-03-07T14:52:07Z
draft = true
+++

# The Value of Resilience

### Thesis

1. The value of resilience is a number, and specifically, a price. 
2. It represents the value, on the margin, of operating your business per established expectations.
3. The market for resilience is global, not local to your business. In the long run, its price is influenced by your competitors. Ignore this at your own peril.

### Definitions

Definition 1. A business is a sequence of (_expected future, or realized past or present_) profits over time.

Definition 2. The value of a business is the sum of: (a) the discounted, **_risk-adjusted_**, net present value of its sequence of expected future profits (_which are unknown and unrealized_), or `**_NPVFP_**`, and (b) the value today of its assets less its liabilities, or _liquidation value_ (_which is known and realized_).

Note D2. Multiple -- and different -- sequences of future profits can have the same `NPVFP`. Even though these sequences may have the same point value for `NPVFP`, they may have different values of variance (risk), skew, kurtosis \& higher moments, associated with that point valuation. Importantly: investors are generally risk averse, and so business models with lower variance in their `NPVFP` will generally receive a risk-premium in their point valuation.

Definition 3. The market value of a business is the value determined, using Definition 2, by the market's _expectations_ of its expected future profits, in aggregate.

Definition 4. Given a market valuation of a business at a point in time, the Implicit-NPVFP (`**_INPVFP_**`) of that business at that time is the `NPVFP` of _any_ sequence of expected future profits consistent with the market valuation for that business.

Definition 5. A business is mispriced if its `NPVFP` diverges from its `INPVFP`.

Note D5.1. Generally, assets and liabilities for a company are known when financial statements are prepared, and are not the primary source for mispricing risk. The opportunity for mispricing is greatest when leading indicators of future profits suggest a deviation from the `INPVFP` established by the current market valuation.

Note D5.2. In principle, accounting standards such as GAAP allow investors the opportunity to compare businesses in more of an apples-to-apples sense. This means that businesses with direct competitors and similar business models are more subject to pricing pressure that forces a convergence to their competitors' valuations. Supporting a business valuation that is **_not_** subject to this pricing pressure requires (_at least market perception of_) meaningful differentiation in business models.

Definition 6. A business is in error if its `NPVFP` is **_less_** than its `INPVFP`.

Definition 7. A business is resilient if it has the capacity to recover from error, on demand.

Definition 8. The **_value of resilience_** for a business is the value of `(INPVFP - NPVFP)` when it is in error.

### Simplifying Assumptions

Assumption 1. The part of `NPVFP` attributable to technology teams is determined by the market value of the features they create.

Note A1. For Agile teams, each sprint / increment has an expected economic value equal to the `NPVFP` of the incremental future profits generated by the features developed in that sprint.

Assumption 2. Technology teams can allocate their resources to two distinct types of work in a sprint: (a) feature delivery (FD), and (b) capacity enhancements (CE). FD is a direct driver of `NPVFP`, and amounts to its fulfillment. CE, which competes with FD for sprint bandwidth per sprint, increases the ability for that team to deliver _greater_ incremental value _in future sprints_.

Assumption 3. CE influences business valuation via (a) its impact on assset values, (b) its impact on liability values, and (c) its impact on `NPVFP`. 

Assumption 5. CE increases `NPVFP` via (a) reducing the cost of future feature delivery, and/or (b) increasing the customer value of future feature delivery, and/or (c) reducing the variance of `NPVFP`.

### Verification

